## genomepy
The core functionality of genomepy is to search, download and prepare genomes and gene annotations.
These functions are split over two CLI functions: `genomepy search` and `genomepy install`.

### Search
Search will query all providers for a given search term.
If desired only one provider can be searched at a time.
Once entered, the search term is normalized for case and whitespace for ease of use.
Genomepy can search for text terms, taxonomy identifiers and accession numbers, and will automatically detect which is used in the search term.
For taxonomy identifiers, all assemblies with matching IDs are returned.
For accession numbers and text terms, all assemblies containing the term in their respective field are returned.
Additionally text terms found in any other descriptive fields are also returned.

### Install
When an assembly has been selected, the name can be passed to the install function.
If the assembly is available from multiple providers, then specific provider can be passed as well.
If an assembly from an unsupported provider is preferred, direct download links may be supplied in order to receive the same processing.
This may be useful if the external provider contains a novel or more recent assembly of organisms in their specialized field.
This results in a consistent output from any desired provider.

The function first downloads the genome assembly with soft masking (repetitive sequences written in lower case).
Sequence masking can be turned off, or set to hard (repetitive sequences written as Ns).

Reference assemblies often contain alternate sequences to reflect biological diversity.
For the purpose of sequence alignment however, the best results are obtained if there is one reference per nucleotide.
Therefore genomepy filters out alternative regions, unless specified otherwise.
Additional regex filters may be passed to either include or exclude sequences by name.
For instance to filter for chromosomes, or filter out unplaced contigs or the mitochondrial sequence.

Once processing is performed, genomepy generates several commonly used support files.
The genome is indexed using pyfaidx @https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.970v1, and contig sizes and contig gap sizes are stored in separate files.

If specified, genomepy will attempt to download a gene annotation:
genomepy will search the database for a GFF, GTF, BED or (for UCSC only) text format gene annotation.
The annotation is then processed to the commonly used GTF and BED output formats using the UCSC conversion tools @http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/.
If the genome is present after downloading the annotation, the contig names between the genome and gene annotation are checked for compatibility.
Should the contig names mismatch, genomepy will attempt to match the names in the annotations to those in the genome.

During the installation process, a README file is created which logs the URLs to the source files, the steps performed, and contigs filtered out.
The file is updated should the process is expanded later, such as by downloading other assets or running a plugin.

### Plugins
Genomepy facilitates several optional processing steps via plugins.
These include downloading of blacklists (by the Kundaje lab @https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45839-z) for the genomes that have them, and the generation of aligner indexes.
These options can be toggled using the `genomepy plugin` function, which also includes and overview of available plugins.
Enabled plugins will run upon (re)running the install function.

Blacklists are available for several UCSC genomes, and GRCh38.
If no blacklist is available the program will proceed after giving a warning.

Genomepy support generation of several popular genome aligners: Bowtie2, BWA, GMAP or Minimap2, and splice-aware aligners such as STAR and HISAT2.
The splice-aware aligners function both with and without gene annotations.
Should no gene annotation be downloaded, the program will issue a warning and proceed to generate a splice-unaware aligner.
By default genomepy supports multithreading aligner indexing.
Unless specified, up to eight cores are used depending on the number available.

### Provider indexing
In order to search, genomepy acquires an overview of available assemblies from each supported providers when first required.
For Ensembl and UCSC, this is possible via their REST API.
NCBI does not provide a REST API for their genome database, but their FTP archives contain several assembly overviews.
Each of these databases is converted to a dictionary with the assembly name as key.
The databases are supplied as dictionaries as well, resulting in a nested dictionary.
Each provider uses a different filing system, which genomepy parses to group together similar features.
For instance, NCBI uses two fields for taxonomy identifiers ("species_taxid" and "taxid"), which are both used by genomepy when searching by taxonomy identifier.

The parsed databases are stored in a local cache for seven days in order to balance quick lookups, while staying up to date.

```python
>>> import genomepy
>>> p = genomepy.ProviderBase.create("ucsc")
Downloading assembly summaries from UCSC
>>> g = p.genomes
>>> next(iter(g))
'ailMel1'
>>> g['ailMel1']
{'description': 'Dec. 2009 (BGI-Shenzhen 1.0/ailMel1)', 'nibPath': '/gbdb/ailMel1', 'organism': 'Panda', 'defaultPos': 'GL192818.1:558576-566855', 'active': 1, 'orderKey': 16070, 'genome': 'Panda', 'scientificName': 'Ailuropoda melanoleuca', 'htmlPath': '/gbdb/ailMel1/html/description.html', 'hgNearOk': 0, 'hgPbOk': 0, 'sourceName': 'BGI-Shenzhen AilMel 1.0 Dec. 2009', 'taxId': 9646}
```

### Command line example
Here we demonstrate a typical example using genomepy.
Commands are indicated by a dollar sign, and standard output was trimmed for brevity.

```bash
$ genomepy search "drosophila mel" --provider ucsc
name    provider    accession          species                    tax_id    other_info                                  
dm1     UCSC        na                 Drosophila melanogaster    7227      Jan. 2003 (BDGP R3/dm1)                     
dm2     UCSC        na                 Drosophila melanogaster    7227      Apr. 2004 (BDGP R4/dm2)                     
dm3     UCSC        GCA_000001215.2    Drosophila melanogaster    7227      Apr. 2006 (BDGP R5/dm3)                     
dm6     UCSC        GCA_000001215.4    Drosophila melanogaster    7227      Aug. 2014 (BDGP Release 6 + ISO1 MT/dm6)    
 ^
 Use name for genomepy install

$ genomepy plugin enable blacklist star
Enabled plugins: blacklist, star

$ genomepy install dm3 --annotation
Downloading genome from UCSC.
Target URL: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/dm3/bigZips/chromFa.tar.gz...
Genome download successful, starting post processing...

name: dm3
local name: dm3
fasta: /home/siebrenf/.local/share/genomes/dm3/dm3.fa
Downloading annotation from UCSC.
Target URL: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/dm3/bigZips/genes/dm3.ensGene.gtf.gz...

Annotation download successful
Creating star index... 
Downloading blacklist http://mitra.stanford.edu/kundaje/akundaje/release/blacklists/dm3-D.melanogaster/dm3-blacklist.bed.gz

$ ls ~/.local/share/genomes/dm3
dm3.annotation.bed.gz  dm3.annotation.gtf.gz  dm3.blacklist.bed  dm3.fa  dm3.fa.fai  dm3.fa.sizes  dm3.gaps.bed  index  README.txt

$ ls ~/.local/share/genomes/dm3/index
star

$ head ~/.local/share/genomes/dm3/README.txt 
name: dm3
provider: UCSC
original name: dm3
original filename: chromFa.tar.gz
assembly_accession: GCA_000001215.2
tax_id: 7227
mask: soft
genome url: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/dm3/bigZips/chromFa.tar.gz
annotation url: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/dm3/bigZips/genes/dm3.ensGene.gtf.gz
sanitized annotation: not required
```
## Python example
The core genomepy functions, such as `search` and `install` are exposed on import.
In order to visualize the install function the individual steps are executed in this example, rather than calling the `genomepy.install()` function directly.
Commands are indicated by `>>>`, and prints were trimmed for brevity.

```python
>>> import os
>>> import genomepy

>>> for row in genomepy.search("melanogaster", "ucsc"):
>>>     print("\t".join([x.decode('utf-8') for x in row]))
    
dm1	UCSC	na	Drosophila melanogaster	7227	Jan. 2003 (BDGP R3/dm1)
dm2	UCSC	na	Drosophila melanogaster	7227	Apr. 2004 (BDGP R4/dm2)
dm3	UCSC	GCA_000001215.2	Drosophila melanogaster	7227	Apr. 2006 (BDGP R5/dm3)
dm6	UCSC	GCA_000001215.4	Drosophila melanogaster	7227	Aug. 2014 (BDGP Release 6 + ISO1 MT/dm6)

>>> p = genomepy.ProviderBase.create("ucsc")
>>> p.download_genome("dm3", annotation=True)
Genome download successful, starting post processing...
name: dm3
local name: dm3
fasta: /home/siebrenf/.local/share/genomes/dm3/dm3.fa

>>> genome = genomepy.Genome("dm3")
>>> plugins = genomepy.plugin.init_plugins()
>>> plugins["star"].after_genome_download(genome)
Creating star index... 

>>> plugins["blacklist"].after_genome_download(genome)
Downloading blacklist http://mitra.stanford.edu/kundaje/akundaje/release/blacklists/dm3-D.melanogaster/dm3-blacklist.bed.gz

>>> p.download_annotation("dm3")
Downloading annotation from UCSC.
Target URL: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/dm3/bigZips/genes/dm3.ensGene.gtf.gz...
Annotation download successful

>>> genomepy.utils.sanitize_annotation(genome)

>>> path = os.path.expanduser("~/.local/share/genomes/dm3")
>>> os.listdir(path)
['dm3.annotation.gtf.gz', 'dm3.blacklist.bed', 'dm3.gaps.bed', 'dm3.fa', 'index', 'dm3.annotation.bed.gz', 'README.txt', 'dm3.fa.sizes', 'dm3.fa.fai']
```
